Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. George Zebrowski is a young science fiction
writer and editor with four novels, a short story collection, and two
anthologies to his credit. His work is characterized by its serious, thoughtful
approach to writing and a novel execution of ideas. Zebrowski's formal academic
training is in philosophy. We asked him why, with this background, he chose to
write science fiction. It seemed to me that science fiction always seemed the
natural kind of writing. I grew up reading science fiction, and its materials
and the kinds of possibilities that it opened up to myself as a reader seem to
belong peculiarly to this time, as opposed to the feeling I got when I read
Charles Dickens or the 19th century writers, aside from Wells, of course, who
straddled both centuries. It seemed to belong uniquely to the 20th century. Of
course, I didn't think about it that way. That came much later. One of
the elements that usually typifies definitions of science fiction is that it is
a literature of ideas. When we asked Zebrowski how philosophical ideas have been
handled in science fiction, he indicated that the approach has generally been
superficial. Well, it's skin deep, and this is surprising, possibly, to a
literature that professes to be a literature of ideas, and yet two areas,
philosophy and cosmology, seem to be very poorly represented, even though you
would think that science fiction would cover these fields in a very deep
fashion. But this is not really surprising. Most fiction, most literature does
not use philosophy in any original sense. What I mean is that philosophy is
usually derived from somewhere else, from some thinker, and then is simply put
to some use as background in a science fiction story or even in a contemporary
novel.
Most writers are not original thinkers in this regard. Even Stapledon, who is
the most overtly philosophical of science fiction writers, is clearly a
Spinozist, following the philosophy of Spinoza, a kind of pantheism. There is
not any original philosophizing going on. Of course, it would be ideal if you
could have a science fiction writer who would be an original thinker and would
present original thinking of a philosophical kind in his science fiction. But
then you might say, why doesn't he just write a book of philosophy and then
perhaps use the philosophical, the original philosophical material that he
himself puts forward in his fiction. We asked Zebrowski if any present-day
science fiction writers use this approach. Lem does this to some degree. He's
written philosophical works of enormous size and then used the ideas developed
there for his science fiction. That's very, very rare.
Do writers aim for particular audiences or niches in science fiction? Zebrowski
indicated he does not. Well, I don't particularly aim for any audience. I simply
aim to be clear and to communicate to any reader who can read fiction. The idea
being that such a reader will understand what you have to say. I think I simply
follow the idea of most writers that you have to communicate. More on George
Zebrowski on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and Bill Vernon. Today's show continues the discussion with
science fiction author George Zebrowski. Zebrowski's novels include The Omega
Point and its prequel Ashes and Stars, The Star Web, and the recently published
Macrolife, which we will discuss in detail later. His editing credits include
the anthology Faster Than Light. Zebrowski provided us with many provocative
ideas about the current state of science fiction. For instance, he considers
much of what's published in science fiction unoriginal. Well, if you consider
that science fiction has been anywhere between 10 and 15 percent of all fiction
published, a great number of it, a great amount, is derivative, built on predigested ideas and
predigested plots. A good example takes to the concept of space colonies or the
L-5 society type of thing. It's very often simply been used as just another
place to have an adventure of some kind, or a place to set a murder mystery or a
suspense story of some kind or another. Predigestion seems to be the operative
method of the copiers. Something comes in and it's slightly new and it's not
used for itself. It's used as just another place to have another barbaric
adventure or whatever. It's easier to do this than to be original in each and
every case. And I'm afraid that like many other writers, I wrote what I was most
influenced by. But as you go on, you realize that quite possibly there is a way
of doing things that is a little more original than that.
According to Zebrowski, it may be the marketplace that influences writers to
produce sure-selling, formula-written pieces. Well, the fact is that most
science fiction has a sort of built-in sales potential. A science fiction book
will sell anywhere between 30,000 or 50,000 copies, no matter who wrote it. This
is unfortunate. Most of the best writers of science fiction, however, become
their own genres. Clark, Asimov, Heinlein are genres unto themselves within the
genre. And people will buy the name no matter what they write. This is also
unfortunate, but it is a sign of some progress on the part of the writer. I
think even if you write a fairly experimental kind of book like Macrolife,
because of the built-in potential, there will be a certain number of readers who
will buy it. There will be a smaller number of people who will actually buy it
because they're interested in that kind of thing. Maybe their tastes will be
widened by it. You really can't tell. You just have to do what you really want
to do. You can't simply write to fill a niche in the market. That's what strikes
me as being very cynical in many writers. They do aim for a particular audience,
and they aim to deliver a certain product, and they don't seem to have any other
ambitions. This would be fine if some of these writers were not capable of war,
in which case they're betraying their own abilities. This kind of comment on my
part sounds perhaps very noble to many other writers, and very idealistic, and
they sort of shake their heads in the way that Claggett shook his head at Billy
Budd's innocence.
But that kind of attitude comes out of the environment in which they move, and I
think you can create for yourself an ambitious environment in which you will
produce, or at least have a shot at producing something that will be closer to
what you're capable of doing. On our next show, we will discuss Zebrowski's
ambitious novel, Macrolife.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science
Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. Science fiction author George Zebrowski's
first three novels, The Omega Point, Ashes and Stars, and Star Web, are well
-written space operas with overtones of metaphysics, cosmology, and eschatology.
When Zebrowski's fourth novel, Macrolife, was published in hardcover in 1979,
it received rave reviews from such notables as Arthur C. Clarke, Gregory
Benford, and Gerard K. O'Neill. The basic premise of Macrolife is that a
culture cannot reach its full potential unless it leaves the planet on which it
originated or inhabits. Right. Only in self-contained worlds traveling in
interstellar space, or at least in orbit around a planet, can a culture develop
the social systems required for it to flourish? We asked Zebrowski how he
conceived the idea of Macrolife. And I think I read an article by G. Harry
Stein, who was real hard science, kind of buffed, and he complained that all the
really new ideas, this was around 1961, I think, he complained that all the new
ideas were being ignored by science fiction and that the best speculations were
going on in places like General Electric and think tanks and whatever, and the
science fiction writers were 25 years behind the times. So I looked at one of
the ideas he mentioned, which was a concept called Macro Life, two words, by
Dandridge Cole, and this was for something called the Ultimate Human Society.
And Cole made a lot of sense to me, and so I decided then that I was going to
write a novel to be called Macrolife. So Zebrowski took the central premise of
Dandridge Cole's idea in 1961 and shaped it into a vision. Over the years, I
developed the idea much further than he had taken it. His macro worlds were on
the order of the Queen Mary, 10,000 tons, 10,000 ton worldlets, very small,
probably closer to O'Neill's concept of space colonies. My 600-kilometer egg
shapes with dozens of levels and asteroid cores at the center are much more
ambitious than anything Cole came up with. And also my primary interest was in
the kind of social systems that might develop within this material container,
because you could have almost any kind of social system you want developing
within the economic supports that are provided by this concept of Macrolife,
the kind of self-reproducing mobile space colony that is in effect a form of
life. It moves, it reproduces, it thinks with its human social component. What
does Zebrowski propose would happen if one of the Macrolife units were to
become too heavily populated, or if a disagreement were to develop? Listen as he
explains the possibilities. The possibilities seem endless, especially for
something like the idea of revolt within the human generations. Whenever people
would get to the point of dissatisfaction with a particular system they have,
they would simply create another macro world container using the resources and
help of the parent, create their own society within it. It seems to me that this
would give the kind of conservatism and stability that is demanded by human
beings in a social system, as well as the openness and sense of creativity and
adventure that seems to be lacking from social systems that become too old and
don't want to change. It seems to be an answer to the problem of what is life
for. More on George Zebrowski's Macrolife on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Bill Vernon. George Zebrowski's epic science fiction
novel, Macrolife, proposes the idea that cultures must leave their dirt worlds
in order to develop fully. We asked Zebrowski why he feels a culture cannot
develop fully when it is constrained to a planet's surface. If the resources of
a planet are limited and it has no space-based industry with which to supplement
the finitudes of a planetary surface, then I think the culture will suffer
primarily because of the finitude. As I said, an open, exploration-oriented,
knowledge-oriented Renaissance culture deposits a different kind of world in the
human heart. A limited culture deposits an ecological 60s kind of approach in
the human heart. And I think there's a sense of constriction that would develop.
Take the idea of a zero-growth society. I see that as essentially static, both
materially and culturally in the long run. It would reach a kind of equilibrium
with its environment, recycling everything. And that would be the end, I would
think, of that kind of culture. The idea of such space colonies has appeared in
science fiction, though rarely. But certainly no writer has developed it on the
scale that Zebrowski has. Now there are Macrolife-like books within the field.
Cities in Flight by James Blish is sort of like that. But the cities don't
reproduce. They are old earth cities that simply have taken to wandering around.
It's proto-Macrolife of one kind or another. The ideas have been around, but
the kind of coherent sociocultural approach that I think I've taken in that
book, which will be the basis of at least six or seven other novels, each are
vastly different in technique and form from Macrolife. It just has not been
copied by anybody. The appeal of Macrolife is that the idea of such grandiose
space colonies, as fleshed out by Zebrowski, is new. It is not a rehashed theme.
In fact, Zebrowski feels the idea may be slow to catch on. Most science fiction
writers still don't see it. They still feel that we're going to colonize planets
on a large scale, and I'm afraid that's a very old imperialistic idea of
colonizing. I think there will be people who will attempt to do something with
planets, especially if we develop terraforming techniques, say, for the
transformation of Venus or the Moon. That sort of thing will go on, but frankly,
it's very difficult. It all depends how much energy you have to play around
with, but going to find solar-like planets in other star systems and taking them
over, that really strikes me as a kind of abortion of possible life to come.
That a culture must flee its planet and go into space to bloom, Zebrowski
believes, flies in the face of a long tradition in science fiction. It, of
course, destroys a whole generation of science fictional concepts which demand
that we colonize the planets of other solar systems where I feel if it were
possible to do that, native life might be developing or might one day develop,
and we would be preempting possible biological evolution there. This preempts
all that kind of science fiction and, in fact, says that that'll never happen. A
whole science fictional universe dies if you take Macrolife seriously. George
Zebrowski and the old master, John Campbell, on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Crews. Science fiction writer George Zebrowski,
still in his 30s, has produced a monumental novel, Macrolife, whose style,
scope, and originality will surely influence science fiction for years. John W.
Campbell, Jr. has his indelible stamp on the field of science fiction, primarily
through his 34-year editorship of the magazine Astounding Stories. Zebrowski
actually met Campbell shortly before his death in 1971. We asked him to tell us
a bit about the meeting. I spent six hours in his office, I think it was in
1970, just a year or so before his death. I don't remember the exact date. It
was quite an experience. I think I can sum up Campbell's attitude. He was
sitting behind his desk puffing away on his cigarette holder, very anxious to
have a discussion that would not be him agreeing with me or me agreeing with
him. He picked up a copy, I think, of Orbit by Damon Knight and a copy of
fantasy and science fiction. And he said the interesting thing is the writers in
these two books write beautifully, but they don't think very much. And he said
the great problem of science fiction is you have people who write beautifully
and don't think, and you have people who think gorgeously and can't write. So I
was very impressed with Campbell. And he valued disagreement above easy
agreement. He told me, if you agree with me, I'll change my mind. Some consider
Campbell's influence on science fiction, which bordered on actual dominance
during the 1940s, as a positive development. Others view his contributions with
misgiving. We asked Zebrowski his opinion on the value of Campbell's influence.
His added comments are interesting. I think it was positive, and I think his
disciples do not make the best case for him. They do not represent his ideas.
And I think that it's the worst of John Campbell's effect on writers and on the
publishing of science fiction that has come in for deserved attack. The kind of
interpretation of Campbell that makes sense out of Campbell's approach. I think
Greg Benford put it, Campbell basically wanted broader horizons and a deeper
sense of humanity in his writers. And that's the kind of defense that is not
made of John W. Campbell. I think that John Campbell's legitimate heirs are
people like Ursula Le Guin, Gregory Benford, perhaps Arthur C. Clarke, Philip K.
Dick, Gene Wolfe, and the writers who bring a sense of human character into an
area of broader horizons in ideas, in considering the future of science and
technology, in considering many of the softer sciences. I think the people who
defend Campbell along the lines of, you know, let's have more hard science and
engineering in our fiction, don't really understand what he was trying to do. I
think it was James Blish who said that when you say hard science fiction, what
he meant by it is hard science fiction across the board, hard thinking, fine
writing, hard characterization, that unity of values that I alluded to before.
That's what Campbell really pointed to. And of course he failed to bring about
this kind of science fiction, although he had some success. Anybody would have
to fail to some degree, but I think the people who defend Campbell are usually
those who turn off the literary or ambitious writer. A six-hour meeting of the
minds. John Campbell, the man who probably more than anyone else set the stage
for the kind of science fiction being produced today, and George Zebrowski, one
of today's bright stars destined for greater accomplishment.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.